---
layout: post
title: Water Logging Crisis: An Engineering Perspective
---

### Introduction

In recent years, capital Dhaka and mega city Chittagong are frequently facing water logging crisis, especially during monsoon time. The scenario becoming worse with the rapid urbanization. During the high-intensity rainfall, the city goes down the water and water logging crisis became unbearable for city dwellers. Since heavy rainfall is very common in this region during monsoon time, proper planning and assets management of water drainage system is the utmost need. Due to unplanned development and their effects, imposed extended demand, drainage system of civil infrastructures aren’t capable enough to the rapid transfer of storm water to the open water bodies. This issue is an infrastructure management problem and needs a sustainable planning. Proper use of the term 'Sustainability' is required to integrate while designing the drainage infrastructures of mega cities. The term ‘sustainability’ can be expressed by "Development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs.” For a rapidly growing mega city like Dhaka and Chittagong, a sustainable modern drainage system is the utmost need which will capable to meets the present and future demand. The long term planning is necessary given that scenario of rapid urban growth of the city. It is now high time for other city corporation to learn from the current context. 

However, the present situation can’t be upgraded dramatically. Before finding any solution, we need to look for the causes of such problem and how the scenario can be improved using present infrastructure. Even a moderate intensity rainfall is sufficient enough to create inundation in the main roads both older and newer part of these cities. Chittagong is the main economic hub of the country, a huge economic loss is resulted due to water logging problem each year. The majority part of the city is being affected by water logging crisis due to storm water surge. A similar situation happened a significant part of Dhaka. Water logging problem also leads to various diseases such as malaria, dengue, diarrhea etc. 

### Problems
The principal cause of water logging problem is unplanned development over last years. With the rapid urbanization, the open space area continuously decreases with new developments while enough open spaces allow rapid runoff of storm water surge to canals, ponds, lakes, river, etc. Moreover, people are constructing infrastructure by landfilling open water bodies like canals, ponds, lakes, etc. Such development isn’t bringing good results to our nature. If this development continues, these large cities will be under water during even a small amount of rainfall. 

Besides this, a significant problem occurring unauthorized dumping of solid waste into open drainages and other places. Since the drainage systems run along the roadsides and people are dumping solid waste into these open ditch unconsciously. Due to improper solid waste management and lack of awareness, damping of continuous solid waste directly to the open drainage creating the obstacle to passing storm water and drainages couldn’t able to functioning properly and losing proper connection with the natural water bodies. 

Due to inherent characteristics of the soil, a portion of water gets infiltrate into the subsoil. With the reduction of open space, the amount of infiltration rate has been decreasing as well as runoff area also decrease. Many of open water bodies have been landfilled for the construction and development purpose. These actions imposed increasing demand on existing drainage system, which isn't capable enough to satisfy the present condition. These drainages mightn’t have designed with proper hydraulic and hydrological design, whereas such design allows functioning drainage system during extreme case scenario.

### Solution

The well-planned drainage system is necessary for solving this major problem. Drainage system needs to have a sustainable development based on hydraulic and hydrological design. All of such drainage systems need to design with the historical rainfall database, the amount of rainfall in the catchment area and with the worst case scenario return period. Drainage system layout and their static characteristic (diameter, slope, etc.) need to designed with present demand, regular inspection and maintenance required. Sustainable cities are designed with detention pond or open water spaces that are capable of accepting the high number of water. However, to implement a sustainable drainage system, authority requires to take long term plan given that future increased demand. The scenario can not be improved dramatically within a shorter period. The present focus should be increased the inspection and take immediate maintenance action. Need to check the connectivity among the drainage infrastructures. Authority needs to take a long term planning. City dwellers need to aware about the water logging and relevant risk and need to avoid unauthorized solid waste disposal to the drainage. Digging of nearby canals, ponds, river widening, along with well connected maintained drainage system only can reduce the possibility of future water logging problem.
